Update wav2vec blog post (#175)
huggingface/blog: fine-tune-xlsr-wav2vec2.md

---

<h1>
    Fine-tuning XLS-R for Multi-Lingual ASR with 🤗 Transformers
</h1>

<div class="blog-metadata">

>     <small>Published November 15, 2021.</small>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <small>Updated November 15, 2021. Originally published March 12, 2021.</small>
```

-   [**Wav2Vec2-XLS-R-300M**](https://huggingface.co/facebook/wav2vec2-xls-r-300m)
-   [**Wav2Vec2-XLS-R-1B**](https://huggingface.co/facebook/wav2vec2-xls-r-1b)
-   [**Wav2Vec2-XLS-R-2B**](https://huggingface.co/facebook/wav2vec2-xls-r-2b)

Similar to [BERT\'s masked language modeling
objective](http://jalammar.github.io/illustrated-bert/), XLS-R learns
contextualized speech representations by randomly masking feature
vectors before passing them to a transformer network during
self-supervised pre-training (*i.e.* diagram on the left below).

For fine-tuning, a single linear layer is added on top of the
pre-trained network to train the model on labeled data of audio
downstream tasks such as speech recognition, speech translation and
audio classification (*i.e.* diagram on the right below).

![wav2vec2\_structure](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/patrickvonplaten/scientific_images/master/xls_r.png)

XLS-R shows impressive improvements over previous state-of-the-art
results on both speech recognition, speech translation and
speaker/language identification, *cf.* with Table 3-6, Table 7-10, and
Table 11-12 respectively of the official [paper](Fill%20me...).

> TODO(PVP): add link here

Reviewer 2: Remember to update this as well

> Notebook Setup

Reviewer 2: Maybe in the blog post it should not say "notebook". Also it could link to the colab

[**Wav2Vec2-XLS-R-300M**](https://huggingface.co/facebook/wav2vec2-xls-r-300m) - can be fine-tuned for ASR.

For demonstration purposes, we fine-tune the model on the low resource
ASR dataset of [Common
Voice](https://huggingface.co/datasets/common_voice) that contains only
*ca.* 4h of validated training data.

XLS-R is fine-tuned using Connectionist Temporal Classification (CTC),
which is an algorithm that is used to train neural networks for
sequence-to-sequence problems, such as ASR and handwriting recognition.

I highly recommend reading the well-written blog post [*Sequence
Modeling with CTC (2017)*](https://distill.pub/2017/ctc/) by Awni
Hannun.

Before we start, let\'s install `datasets` and `transformers`. Also, we
need the `torchaudio` to load audio files and `jiwer` to evaluate our
fine-tuned model using the [word error rate
(WER)](https://huggingface.co/metrics/wer) metric \\( {}^1 \\).

```python
!pip install datasets==1.13.3
!pip install transformers==4.11.3
!pip install huggingface_hub==0.1
!pip install torchaudio
!pip install librosa
!pip install jiwer
```

We strongly suggest to upload your training checkpoints directly to the

> [🤗 Hub](https://huggingface.co/) while training. The [🤗

Reviewer 2: Nit, for the Hub we try to avoid the emoji. 

```suggestion
[Hugging Face Hub](https://huggingface.co/) while training. The [Hugging Face
```

Prepare Data, Tokenizer, Feature Extractor
------------------------------------------

ASR models transcribe speech to text, which means that we both need a
feature extractor that processes the speech signal to the model\'s input
format, *e.g.* a feature vector, and a tokenizer that processes the
model\'s output format to text.

In 🤗 Transformers, the XLS-R model is thus accompanied by both a
tokenizer, called
[Wav2Vec2CTCTokenizer](https://huggingface.co/transformers/master/model_doc/wav2vec2.html#wav2vec2ctctokenizer),
and a feature extractor, called
[Wav2Vec2FeatureExtractor](https://huggingface.co/transformers/master/model_doc/wav2vec2.html#wav2vec2featureextractor).

Let\'s start by creating the tokenizer to decode the predicted output
classes to the output transcription.

### Create `Wav2Vec2CTCTokenizer`

A pre-trained XLS-R model maps the speech signal to a sequence of
context representations as illustrated in the figure above. However, for
speech recognition the model has to to map this sequence of context
representations to its corresponding transcription which means that a
linear layer has to be added on top of the transformer block (shown in

> yellow in the diagram above). This linear layer is used to classifies

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
yellow in the diagram above). This linear layer is used to classify
```

> each context representation to a token class analogous how, *e.g.*,

Reviewer 2: This reads a bit difficult and confusing

```suggestion
each context representation to a token class analogous to how
a linear layer is added on top of BERT\'s embeddings
for further classification after pre-training (*cf.* with *\'BERT\'* section of the following [blog
post](https://huggingface.co/blog/warm-starting-encoder-decoder)).
```

| 9   | ancak bedel çok daha yüksek olabilir |
| 10  | başkent fira bir tepenin üzerinde yer alıyor |

Good! This looks better. We have removed most special characters from
transcriptions and normalized them to lower-case only.

Before finalizing the pre-processing, it is always advantageous to
consult a native speaker of the target language to see whether the text
can be further simplified. For this blog post,
[Merve](https://twitter.com/mervenoyann) was kind enough to take a quick
look and noted that \"hatted\" characters - like `â` - aren\'t really
used anymore in Turkish and can be replaced by their \"un-hatted\"
equivalent, *e.g.* `a`.

This means that we should replace a sentence like
`"yargı sistemi hâlâ sağlıksız"` to `"yargı sistemi hala sağlıksız"`.

Let\'s write another short mapping function to further simplify the text

> labels. Remember - the simler the text labels, the easier it is for the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
labels. Remember, the simpler the text labels, the easier it is for the
```

vocab_test = common_voice_test.map(extract_all_chars, batched=True, batch_size=-1, keep_in_memory=True, remove_columns=common_voice_test.column_names)
```

Now, we create the union of all distinct letters in the training dataset
and test dataset and convert the resulting list into an enumerated
dictionary.

```python
vocab_list = list(set(vocab_train["vocab"][0]) | set(vocab_test["vocab"][0]))
```

```python
vocab_dict = {v: k for k, v in enumerate(sorted(vocab_list))}
vocab_dict
```

**Print Output:**

```bash
{
 ' ': 0,
 'a': 1,
 'b': 2,
 'c': 3,
 'd': 4,
 'e': 5,
 'f': 6,
 'g': 7,
 'h': 8,
 'i': 9,
 'j': 10,
 'k': 11,
 'l': 12,
 'm': 13,
 'n': 14,
 'o': 15,
 'p': 16,
 'q': 17,
 'r': 18,
 's': 19,
 't': 20,
 'u': 21,
 'v': 22,
 'w': 23,
 'x': 24,
 'y': 25,
 'z': 26,
 'ç': 27,
 'ë': 28,
 'ö': 29,
 'ü': 30,
 'ğ': 31,
 'ı': 32,
 'ş': 33,
 '̇': 34
}
```

Cool, we see that all letters of the alphabet occur in the dataset
(which is not really surprising) and we also extracted the special
characters `""` and `'`. Note that we did not exclude those special
characters because:

> The model has to learn to predict when a word is finished or else the

Reviewer 2: The line break above seems off, it was there before due to it being a list, but that was deleted

    json.dump(vocab_dict, vocab_file)
```

In a final step, we use the json file to load the vocabulary into an
instance of the `Wav2Vec2CTCTokenizer` class.

```python
from transformers import Wav2Vec2CTCTokenizer

tokenizer = Wav2Vec2CTCTokenizer.from_pretrained("./", unk_token="[UNK]", pad_token="[PAD]", word_delimiter_token="|")
```

If one wants to re-use the just created tokenizer with the fine-tuned
model of this notebook, it is strongly advised to upload the `tokenizer`

> to the [🤗 Hub](https://huggingface.co/). Let\'s call the repo to which

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to the [Hugging Face Hub](https://huggingface.co/). Let\'s call the repo to which
```

tokenizer.push_to_hub(repo_name)
```

Great, you can see the just created repository under
`https://huggingface.co/<your-username>/wav2vec2-large-xls-r-300m-tr-colab`

### Create `Wav2Vec2FeatureExtractor`

> Speech is a continuous signal and to be treated by computers, it first

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Speech is a continuous signal, and, to be treated by computers, it first
```

has to be discretized, which is usually called **sampling**. The

> sampling rate hereby plays an important role in that it defines how many

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
sampling rate hereby plays an important role since it defines how many
```

data points of the speech signal are measured per second. Therefore,
sampling with a higher sampling rate results in a better approximation
of the *real* speech signal but also necessitates more values per
second.

A pretrained checkpoint expects its input data to have been sampled more
or less from the same distribution as the data it was trained on. The
same speech signals sampled at two different rates have a very different

> distribution, *e.g.*, doubling the sampling rate results in data points

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
distribution. For example, doubling the sampling rate results in data points
```

So far, we have not looked at the actual values of the speech signal but
just the transcription. In addition to `sentence`, our datasets include
two more column names `path` and `audio`. `path` states the absolute
path of the audio file. Let\'s take a look.

```python
common_voice_train[0]["path"]
```

XLS-R expects the input in the format of a 1-dimensional array of 16
kHz. This means that the audio file has to be loaded and resampled.

Thankfully, `datasets` does this automatically by calling the other
column `audio`. Let try it out.

```python
common_voice_train[0]["audio"]
```

```bash
    {'array': array([ 0.0000000e+00,  0.0000000e+00,  0.0000000e+00, ...,
            -8.8930130e-05, -3.8027763e-05, -2.9146671e-05], dtype=float32),
     'path': '/root/.cache/huggingface/datasets/downloads/extracted/05be0c29807a73c9b099873d2f5975dae6d05e9f7d577458a2466ecb9a2b0c6b/cv-corpus-6.1-2020-12-11/tr/clips/common_voice_tr_21921195.mp3',
     'sampling_rate': 48000}
```

Great, we can see that the audio file has automatically been loaded.
This is thanks to the new [`"Audio"`
feature](https://huggingface.co/docs/datasets/package_reference/main_classes.html?highlight=audio#datasets.Audio)

> introduced in `datasets == 4.13.3`, which loads and resamples audio

Reviewer 2: Maybe this should link to the release notes

```python
def prepare_dataset(batch):
    audio = batch["audio"]

    # batched output is "un-batched"
    batch["input_values"] = processor(audio["array"], sampling_rate=audio["sampling_rate"]).input_values[0]
    batch["input_length"] = len(batch["input_values"])
    
    with processor.as_target_processor():
        batch["labels"] = processor(batch["sentence"]).input_ids
    return batch
```

Let\'s apply the data preparation function to all examples.

```python
common_voice_train = common_voice_train.map(prepare_dataset, remove_columns=common_voice_train.column_names)
common_voice_test = common_voice_test.map(prepare_dataset, remove_columns=common_voice_test.column_names)
```

**Note**: Currently `datasets` make use of
[`torchaudio`](https://pytorch.org/audio/stable/index.html) and
[`librosa`](https://librosa.org/doc/latest/index.html) for audio loading
and resampling. If you wish to implement your own costumized data
loading/sampling, feel free to just make use of the `"path"` column
instead and disregard the `"audio"` column.

Long input sequences require a lot of memory. XLS-R is based on

> `self-attention` the memory requirement scales quadratically with the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`self-attention`. The memory requirement scales quadratically with the
```

features from the raw speech signal. This part of the model has already
been sufficiently trained during pretraining and as stated in the
[paper](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2006.13979.pdf) does not need to be
fine-tuned anymore. Thus, we can set the `requires_grad` to `False` for
all parameters of the *feature extraction* part.

```python
model.freeze_feature_extractor()
```

In a final step, we define all parameters related to training. To give
more explanation on some of the parameters:

-   `group_by_length` makes training more efficient by grouping training
    samples of similar input length into one batch. This can
    significantly speed up training time by heavily reducing the overall
    number of useless padding tokens that are passed through the model
-   `learning_rate` and `weight_decay` were heuristically tuned until
    fine-tuning has become stable. Note that those parameters strongly
    depend on the Common Voice dataset and might be suboptimal for other
    speech datasets.

For more explanations on other parameters, one can take a look at the
[docs](https://huggingface.co/transformers/master/main_classes/trainer.html?highlight=trainer#trainingarguments).

> During training, a checkpoint will be uploaded asynchronously to the hub

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
During training, a checkpoint will be uploaded asynchronously to the Hub
```

every 400 training steps. It allows you to also play around with the
demo widget even while your model is still training.

**Note**: If one does not want to upload the model checkpoints to the

> hub, simply set `push_to_hub=False`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Hub, simply set `push_to_hub=False`.
```

fine-tuned model. The purpose of this notebook is just to demonstrate
how to fine-tune XLS-R XLSR-Wav2Vec2\'s on an ASR dataset.

Depending on what GPU was allocated to your google colab it might be
possible that you are seeing an `"out-of-memory"` error here. In this
case, it\'s probably best to reduce `per_device_train_batch_size` to 8
or even less and increase
[`gradient_accumulation`](https://huggingface.co/transformers/master/main_classes/trainer.html#trainingarguments).

```python
trainer.train()
```

**Print Output:**

| Training Loss | Epoch | Step | Validation Loss | Wer    |
|:-------------:|:-----:|:----:|:---------------:|:------:|
| 3.8842        | 3.67  | 400  | 0.6794          | 0.7000 |
| 0.4115        | 7.34  | 800  | 0.4304          | 0.4548 |
| 0.1946        | 11.01 | 1200 | 0.4466          | 0.4216 |
| 0.1308        | 14.68 | 1600 | 0.4526          | 0.3961 |
| 0.0997        | 18.35 | 2000 | 0.4567          | 0.3696 |
| 0.0784        | 22.02 | 2400 | 0.4193          | 0.3442 |
| 0.0633        | 25.69 | 2800 | 0.4153          | 0.3347 |
| 0.0498        | 29.36 | 3200 | 0.4077          | 0.3195 |

The training loss and validation WER go down nicely.

> You can now upload the result of the training to the 🤗 Hub, just execute

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can now upload the result of the training to the Hub, just execute
```
